 on a bitingly cold february afternoon i spend a couple of hours walking around rotterdam with arnoud molenaar, the manager of the city’s climate proof program, which aims to make rotterdam resistant to the sea levels expected by 2025\^ about 20 minutes into our walk we climb a sloping street next to a museum designed by the architect rem koolhaas. the concern is that if the acceleration continues, by the time we get to the end of the 21st century, we could see sea-level rise of as much as six feet globally instead of two to three feet.  but the control structures also serve a second function: during the state’s frequent rainstorms their gates must open to discharge the flood of fresh water to the sea.we have about 30 salinity-control structures in south florida, says jayantha obeysekera, the chief hydrological modeler at the south florida water management district.  no matter how much we reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, foster says, we’re already locked in to at least several feet of sea-level rise, and perhaps several dozens of feet, as the planet slowly adjusts to the amount of carbon that’s in the atmosphere already.  during the last ice age there was a mile or two of ice above us right here, says malcolm bowman, as we pull into his driveway in stony brook, new york, on long island’s north shore. the final component of the delta works, a movable barrier protecting rotterdam harbor and some 1\^5 million people, was finished in 1997\^  like other primary sea barriers in the netherlands, it’s built to withstand a 1-in-10,000-year storm—the strictest standard in the world.  as we walk, molenaar points out assorted subtle flood-control structures: an underground parking garage designed to hold 10,000 cubic meters—more than 2\^5 million gallons—of rainwater; a street flanked by two levels of sidewalks, with the lower one designed to store water, leaving the upper walkway dry. it might take thousands of years and more than a thousand parts per million to create such a world—but if we burn all the fossil fuels, we will get there.  bowman, a physical oceanographer at the state university of new york at stony brook, has been trying for years to persuade anyone who will listen that new york city needs a harbor-spanning storm-surge barrier. but as sea level has risen since the ice age, the waves no longer reach deep enough to stir up sand, and the currents have less sand to spread around.  unless we change course dramatically in the coming years, our carbon emissions will create a world utterly different in its very geography from the one in which our species evolved. using a conservative prediction of a half meter (20 inches) of sea-level rise, the organisation for economic co-operation and development estimates that by 2070, 150 million people in the world’s large port cities will be at risk from coastal flooding, along with $35 trillion worth of property—an amount that will equal 9 percent of the global gdp\^ how will they cope. by releasing carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere, we have warmed the earth by more than a full degree fahrenheit over the past century and raised sea level by about eight inches. the southern barrier alone, stretching five miles between sandy hook, new jersey, and the rockaway peninsula, might cost $10 billion to $15 billion, bowman estimates. if we see that sea-level rise increases, we can increase the amount of sand.  the storm roared in from the north sea on the night of january 31, 1953\^ ria geluk was six years old at the time and living where she lives today, on the island of schouwen duiveland in the southern province of zeeland. i have six surfboards in my apartment, and i was thinking, if anything comes through the wall, i’ll try to get everyone on those boards and try to get up the block. orff would re-create some of them, particularly the sandy hook–coney island chain, and connect them with sluice gates that would close during a storm, forming an eco-engineered barrier that would cross the same waters as bowman’s more conventional one. to offset the greater density of salt water, the freshwater level in the control structures is generally kept about two feet higher than the encroaching sea.  bowman envisions two barriers: one at throgs neck, to keep surges from long island sound out of the east river, and a second one spanning the harbor south of the city. at times now the water level in the sea is higher than the freshwater level in the canal^ that both accelerates saltwater intrusion and prevents the discharge of flood waters.  later mulder tells me about a memorial inscription affixed to the eastern scheldt barrier in zeeland: it says, ‘hier gaan over het tij, de maan, de wind, en wij—here the tide is ruled by the moon, the wind, and us.’  it reflects the confidence of a generation that took for granted, as we no longer can, a reasonably stable world. with more than 10,000 miles of dikes, the netherlands is fortified to such an extent that hardly anyone thinks about the threat from the sea, largely because much of the protection is so well integrated into the landscape that it’s nearly invisible.  with the threats of climate change and sea-level rise looming over us all, cities around the world, from new york to ho chi minh city, have turned to the netherlands for guidance.  using fresh water to block the salt water will eventually become impractical, because the amount of fresh water needed would submerge ever larger areas behind the control structures, in effect flooding the state from the inside. cars began to float in the churning water, their wailing alarms adding to the cacophony of wind, rushing water, and cracking wood. and it wouldn’t be money wasted: even if another sandy never happens, you’d have a cleaner, restored harbor in a more ecologically vibrant context and a healthier new york. the limestone consists of the remains of countless marine creatures deposited more than 65 million years ago, when a warm, shallow sea covered what is now florida—a past that may resemble the future here.  in the last several years we’ve observed accelerated melting of the ice sheets in greenland and west antarctica, says radley horton, a research scientist at columbia university’s earth institute in new york city. if the scheme works, over the next 20 years the wind, waves, and tides will spread its sand 15 miles up and down the coast. the westzeedijk shields the inner city from the meuse river a few blocks to the south, but the broad, busy boulevard on top of it looks like any other dutch thoroughfare, with flocks of cyclists wheeling along in dedicated lanes. the homes of 2040 will not necessarily be domes; roeffen chose that shape for its structural integrity and its futuristic appeal^ to build on water is not new, but to develop floating communities on a large scale and in a harbor with tides—that is new, says molenaar. but we should not build a city now that we know will not function in 2100\^ there are opportunities to renew our infrastructure
